## Lesson 01

### Computational Thinking, Problem Solving, Binary Digits, and Encoding/Decoding
- All computer science is, is the use of computational thinking (CT is a problem-solving method that involves breaking down complex problems into smaller, more manageable parts and developing step-by-step solutions) to solve problems. Programming is one way to implement computational thinking. It uses human-readable code to communicate with the computer. The implementation of computational thinking using a programming language is called a "program." The basic structure of a program is this:
  - INPUT -> [PROCESS] -> OUTPUT. The Programmer's job is to write the code that represents the “process.”
- Let's say we are a owner of a grocery store, and we need to count the number of apples we have available for sale. We can simply use our fingers. We can count the apples one by one, and keep track of the count. If we only use our fingers, we are using a unary system, or base-1 counting system. A unary systsem only uses a single symbol to count. Other examples of unary counting are hash marks, or tally marks.
- Computers, of course, don't use a unary system. They use a binary system, or base-2 counting system. In a binary system, there are only two symbols: 0 and 1.
  - If you have ever heard of a bit, this word is short for "binary digit." A bit is the smallest unit of data in a computer. It can only have one of two values: 0 or 1. A byte is a group of 8 bits. A byte can represent 2^8, or 256, different values. A byte is the smallest unit of memory in a computer.
  - Now, as humans, most of us use a different system for counting, called the decimal system, or base-10 counting system. In a base-10 system, there are 10 symbols: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
  - There are also, of course, other counting systems, like hexadecimal, or base-16 counting system. In a base-16 system, there are 16 symbols: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, and F. Or a base-60 counting system, called sexagesimal, which is used in timekeeping. Or a base-12 counting system, called duodecimal, which is used also for timekeeping, but also for measurements. Or a base-64 counting system, which is used as a binary-to-text encoding scheme.
- But how do computers speak in binary? Why is that their system?
  - If we want to represent digits, symbols, data, and ideas, we need to do so physically, somehow. Of course, we know that we use physical representations of binary all the time. Light switches. A light switch can be in one of two positions: on or off. This is a binary system. A light switch is a physical representation of a bit.
  - Inside the computer, there are, metaphorically millions of little light bulbs, or little switches. These switches are called transistors. A transistor is a tiny switch that can be in one of two positions: on or off, 1 or 0, or true or false.
  - But in its most literal form, a transistor is a tiny piece of silicon, a semiconductor, that can be in one of two states: conductive or non-conductive. When a transistor is conductive, it is on, or 1. When a transistor is non-conductive, it is off, or 0.
  - Everything a computer does in based in this binary system.
- But if everything is 0s and 1s, how does a computer do other stuff, like send emails, make network requests, or play games?
  - Computers can do all of these things because the 0s and 1s can represent more than just numbers. They can represent text, images, sound, and video. They can represent anything that can be represented as a sequence of 0s and 1s - which, is actually a lot!
  - For example, text can be represented as a sequence of numbers. For example, the letter "A" can be represented as the number 65. The letter "B" can be represented as the number 66. The letter "C" can be represented as the number 67. And so on.
  - This is called ASCII, or the American Standard Code for Information Interchange. ASCII is a character encoding standard that uses numbers to represent text. ASCII is a 7-bit encoding, which means that it uses 7 bits to represent each character. This means that there are 2^7, or 128, possible characters that can be represented in ASCII.
  - But 128 characters isn't enough to represent all of the characters in all of the world's languages. So there are other character encoding standards, like Unicode, that use more bits to represent more characters. Unicode is a 32-bit encoding, which means that it uses up to 32 bits (4 bytes) to represent each character. This means that there are 2^32, or 1.1M possible characters that can be represented in Unicode.
- But all of this encoding has yet only represented text. How do we represent images, sound, and video?
  - Images can be represented as a sequence of numbers, too. Each pixel in an image can be represented as bits. No doubt you have seen RGB values before. An RGB value is a sequence of three numbers that represent the red, green, and blue values of a pixel. For example, a red pixel can be represented as the numbers 255, 0, 0. A green pixel can be represented as the numbers 0, 255, 0. A blue pixel can be represented as the numbers 0, 0, 255. How many bits/byes do you think it takes to represent a pixel in an image using RGB values?
  - Sound can be represented as a sequence of numbers, too. Each sound wave can be represented as a number. For example, a low pitch can be represented as the number 0. A high pitch can be represented as the number 255 (or greater, depending on the number of bits you want to use to story different wavelengths).
  - And video is simply a sequence of images, encoded with as many bytes as necessary to represent each pixel in each image to the level of detail you want.
  - This is called encoding. Encoding is the process of converting data from one form to another - in our cases from bits to text, sound, images, and video. Encoding is used to represent data in a way that is efficient, secure, and/or standardized. But what is most important to remember is that all of this encoding is based on the binary system. Everything a computer does is based on the binary system.